Will you stay no longer?
nor will you not thatI go with you?
By your patience, no. Mystars shine darkly over me:
the malignancy of my fate mightperhaps distemper yours;
therefore I shall craveof you your leave
that I may bear my evilsalone: it were a bad
recompense for your love,to lay any of them on you.
: Let me yet know of youwhither you are bound.
No, sooth, sir: my determinatevoyage is mere extravagancy.
But I perceive inyou so excellent
a touch of modesty, that youwill not extort from me
what I am willing to keep in;
therefore it charges me
in manners the ratherto express myself.
You must know of me then,Antonio, my name is Sebastian,
which I called Roderigo.My father was that
Sebastian of Messaline, whomI know you have heard of.
He left behind himmyself and a sister,
both born in an hour: if theheavens had been pleased,
would we had so ended! butyou, sir, altered that;
for some hour before youtook me from the breach of
the sea was my sisterdrowned.
Alas the day!
A lady, sir, though it wassaid she much resembled me,
was yet of manyaccounted beautiful:
but, though I could notwith such estimable wonder
overfar believe that, yet thusfar I will boldly publish her;
she bore a mind that envycould not but call fair.
She is drowned already,sir, with salt water,
though I seem to drown herremembrance again with more.
Pardon me, sir, your badentertainment.
O good Antonio, forgive meyour trouble.
If you will not murderme for my love,
let me be your servant.
If you will not undo whatyou have done, that is,
kill him whom you haverecovered, desire it not.
Fare ye well at once: mybosom is full of kindness,
and I am yet so near themanners of my mother,
that upon the least occasionmore mine eyes will tell
tales of me. I am bound to theCount Orsino's court: farewell.
The gentleness of all thegods go with thee!
I have many enemies inOrsino's court,
Else would I very shortlysee thee there.
But, come what may, I doadore thee so,
That danger shall seemsport, and I will go.
Approach, Sir Andrew:
not to be abed after midnightis to be up betimes;
and 'diluculo surgere,'thou know'st,--
Nay, my troth, I knownot: but I know,
to be up late is to be up late.
A false conclusion: I hateit as an unfilled can.
To be up after midnight andto go to bed then, is early:
so that to go tobed after midnight
is to go to bed betimes.
Does not our life consistof the four elements?
Faith, so they say; but Ithink it rather consists
of eating and drinking.
Thou'rt a scholar; let ustherefore eat and drink.
Marian, I say! a stoup ofwine!
Here comes the fool, i'faith.
How now, my hearts! didyou never see the picture
of 'we three'?
Welcome, ass. Now let'shave a catch.
By my troth, the fool hasan excellent breast.
I had rather than fortyshillings I had such a leg,
and so sweet a breath tosing, as the fool has.
Come on; there is sixpencefor thee: let's have a song.
There's a testril of metoo: if one knight give a--
Would you have a love-song,or a song of good life?
A love-song, a love-song.
Ay, ay: I care not forgood life.
[♪Sings]
O mistress mine, where areyou roaming?
O, stay and hear; yourtrue love's coming,
That can sing both highand low:
Trip no further, prettysweeting;
Journeys end in loversmeeting,
Every wise man's son dothknow.
Excellent good, i' faith.
Good, good.
[Sings]
What is love? 'tis nothereafter;
Present mirth hath presentlaughter;
What's to come is stillunsure:
In delay there lies noplenty;
Then come kiss me, sweetand twenty,
Youth's a stuff will notendure.
A mellifluous voice, as Iam true knight.
A contagious breath.
Very sweet and contagious,i' faith.
To hear by the nose, it isdulcet in contagion.
But shall we make thewelkin dance indeed?
shall we rouse the night-owl ina catch that will draw three
souls out of one weaver?shall we do that?
An you love me, let'sdo't: I am dog at a catch.
By'r lady, sir, and somedogs will catch well.
Most certain. Let ourcatch be, 'Thou knave.'
'Hold thy peace, thouknave,' knight?
I shall be constrained in'tto call thee knave, knight.
'Tis not the first time Ihave constrained one to
call me knave. Begin, fool:it begins 'Hold thy peace.'
I shall never begin if Ihold my peace.
Good, i' faith. Come,begin.
(singing) Hold thy peace. Thouknave hold thy peace.
What a caterwaulingdo you keep here!
If my lady have not calledup her steward Malvolio
and bid him turn you outof doors, never trust me.
My lady's a Cataian, we arepoliticians, Malvolio's
a Peg-a-Ramsey, and'Three merry men be we.'
Am not I consanguineous?am I not of her blood?
Tillyvally. Lady!
(Sings)
'There dwelt a man inBabylon, lady, lady!'
Beshrew me, the knight'sin admirable fooling.
Ay, he does well enoughif he be disposed,
and so do I too: he doesit with a better grace,
but I do it more natural.
[Sings] 'O, the twelfth dayof December,'--
For the love o' God,peace!
My masters, are youmad? or what are you?
Have ye no wit,manners, nor honesty,
but to gabble like tinkersat this time of night?
Do ye make an alehouseof my lady's house,
that ye squeak outyour coziers' catches
without any mitigationor remorse of voice?
Is there no respect of place,persons, nor time in you?
We did keep time, sir, inour catches. Sneck up!
Sir Toby, I must be round withyou. My lady bade me tell you,
that, though she harboursyou as her kinsman,
she's nothing alliedto your disorders.
If you can separate yourselfand your misdemeanors,
you are welcome tothe house; if not,
an it would please youto take leave of her,
she is very willingto bid you farewell.
'Farewell, dear heart, sinceI must needs be gone.'
Nay, good Sir Toby.
'His eyes do show his daysare almost done.'
Is't even so?
'But I will never die.'
Sir Toby, there you lie.
This is much credit toyou.
'Shall I bid him go?'
'What an if you do?'
'Shall I bid him go, andspare not?'
'O no, no, no, no, youdare not.'
Out o' tune, sir: ye lie. Artany more than a steward?
Dost thou think, becausethou art virtuous,
there shall be nomore cakes and ale?
Yes, by Saint Anne, and gingershall be hot i' the mouth too.
Thou'rt i' the right. Go, sir,rub your chain with crumbs.
A stoup of wine, Maria!
Mistress Mary, if youprized my lady's favour
at any thing morethan contempt,
you would not give meansfor this uncivil rule:
she shall know ofit, by this hand.
Go shake your ears.
'Twere as good a deed asto drink when a man's
a-hungry, to challengehim the field,
and then to break promise withhim and make a fool of him.
Do't, knight: I'll writethee a challenge:
or I'll deliver thy indignationto him by word of mouth.
Sweet Sir Toby, bepatient for tonight:
since the youth of the count'swas today with thy lady,
she is much out of quiet.For Monsieur Malvolio,
let me alone with him: if I donot gull him into a nayword,
and make him acommon recreation,
do not think I have wit enoughto lie straight in my bed:
I know I can do it.
Possess us, possess us;tell us something of him.
Marry, sir, sometimes heis a kind of puritan.
O, if I thought that I'ldbeat him like a dog!
What, for being a puritan? thyexquisite reason, dear knight?
I have no exquisitereason for't,
but I have reasongood enough.
The devil a puritan that heis, or any thing constantly,
but a time-pleaser;an affectioned ass,
that cons state without book
and utters it by great swarths:the best persuaded of himself,
so crammed, as he thinks,with excellencies,
that it is his grounds of faith
that all that lookon him love him;
and on that vicein him
will my revenge findnotable cause to work.
What wilt thou do?
I will drop in his way someobscure epistles of love;
wherein, by thecolour of his beard,
the shape of his leg,the manner of his gait,
the expressure of his eye,forehead, and complexion,
he shall find himself mostfeelingly personated.
I can write very likemy lady your niece:
on a forgotten matter
we can hardly makedistinction of our hands.
Excellent! I smell adevice.
I have't in my nose too.
He shall think, by theletters that thou wilt drop,
that they come from my niece,
and that she's inlove with him.
My purpose is, indeed, ahorse of that colour.
And your horse now wouldmake him an ass.
Ass, I doubt not.
O, 'twill be admirable!
Sport royal, I warrant you:
I know my physic will work withhim. I will plant you two,
and let the fool make a third,where he shall find the letter:
observe his construction of it.
For this night, to bed,and dream on the event.
Farewell. Goodnight, Penthesilea.
Before me, she's a goodwench.
She's a beagle, true-bred,and one that adores me:
what o' that?
I was adored once too.
Let's to bed, knight. Thou hadstneed send for more money.
If I cannot recover yourniece, I am a foul way out.
Send for money, knight: ifthou hast her not i' the end,
call me cut.
If I do not, never trustme, take it how you will.
Come, come, I'll go burnsome sack; 'tis too late
to go to bed now: come,knight; come, knight.
(♪Sings a song)
What is love? 'tis nothereafter;
Present mirth hath presentlaughter;
What's to come is stillunsure:
In delay there lies noplenty;
Then come kiss me, sweetand twenty,
Youth's a stuff will notendure.
Give me some music. Now,good morrow, friends.
Now, good Cesario, butthat piece of song,
That old and antique songwe heard last night:
Methought it did relievemy passion much,
More than light airs andrecollected terms
Of these most brisk andgiddy-paced times:
Come, but one verse.
He is not here, so please yourlordship that should sing it.
Who was it?
Feste, the jester, mylord; a fool that the lady
Olivia's father tookmuch delight in.
He is about thehouse. Seek him out,
and play the tune the while.
Come hither, boy:
(♪Music plays)
if ever thou shalt love,
In the sweet pangs of itremember me;
For such as I am all truelovers are,
Unstaid and skittish inall motions else,
Save in the constant imageof the creature
That is beloved. How dostthou like this tune?
It gives a very echo tothe seat
Where Love is throned.
Thou dost speak masterly:
My life upon't, youngthough thou art,
thine eye Hath stay'd uponsome favour that it loves:
Hath it not, boy?
A little, by your favour.
What kind of woman is't?
Of your complexion.
She is not worth thee,then. What years, i' faith?
About your years, my lord.
Too old by heaven: letstill the woman take
An elder than herself: sowears she to him,
So sways she level in herhusband's heart:
For, boy, however we dopraise ourselves,
Our fancies are more giddyand unfirm,
More longing, wavering,sooner lost and worn,
Than women's are.
I think it well, my lord.
Then let thy love beyounger than thyself,
Or thy affection cannothold the bent;
For women are as roses,whose fair flower
Being once display'd, dothfall that very hour.
And so they are: alas,that they are so;
To die, even when they toperfection grow!
O, fellow, come, the songwe had last night.
Mark it, Cesario, it isold and plain;
The spinsters and theknitters in the sun
And the free maids that weavetheir thread with bones
Do use to chant it: it issilly sooth,
And dallies with theinnocence of love,
Like the old age.
Are you ready, sir?
Ay; prithee, sing.
(♪SONG)
Come away, come away,death,
And in sad cypress let mebe laid;
Fly away, fly away breath;
I am slain by a fair cruelmaid.
My shroud of white, stuckall with yew,
O, prepare it!
My part of death, no oneso true
No one, no one, Did share it.
Not a flower, not a flowersweet
On my black coffin letthere be strown;
Not a friend, not a friendgreet
My poor corpse, where mybones shall be thrown:
A thousand thousand sighsto save,
Lay me, O, where
Sad true lover never findmy grave,
To weep there! ♪
There's for thy pains.
No pains, sir: I takepleasure in singing, sir.
I'll pay thy pleasurethen.
Truly, sir, and pleasure willbe paid, one time or another.
Give me now leave to leavethee.
Now, the melancholygod protect thee;
and the tailor make thy doubletof changeable taffeta,
for thy mind is a very opal.
I would have men of suchconstancy put to sea,
that their businessmight be every thing
and their intent every where;
for that's it that always makesa good voyage of nothing.
Farewell. Let all therest give place.
Once more, Cesario,
Get thee to yond samesovereign cruelty:
Tell her, my love, morenoble than the world,
Prizes not quantity ofdirty lands;
The parts that fortunehath bestow'd upon her,
Tell her, I hold asgiddily as fortune;
But 'tis that miracle andqueen of gems
That nature pranks her inattracts my soul.
But if she cannot loveyou, sir?
I cannot be so answer'd.
Sooth, but you must.
Say that some lady, asperhaps there is,
Hath for your love a greata pang of heart
As you have for Olivia:you cannot love her;
You tell her so; must shenot then be answer'd?
There is no woman's sides
Can bide the beating of sostrong a passion
As love doth give myheart; no woman's heart
So big, to hold so much;they lack retention
Alas, their love may becall'd appetite,
No motion of the liver,but the palate,
That suffer surfeit,cloyment and revolt;
But mine is all as hungryas the sea,
And can digest as much:make no compare
Between that love a womancan bear me
And that I owe Olivia.
Ay, but I know--
What dost thou know?
Too well what love womento men may owe:
In faith, they are as trueof heart as we.
My father had a daughterloved a man,
As it might be, perhaps,were I a woman,
I should your lordship.
And what's her history?
A blank, my lord. Shenever told her love,
But let concealment, likea worm i' the bud,
Feed on her damask cheek:she pined in thought,
And with a green andyellow melancholy
She sat like patience on amonument,
Smiling at grief. Was notthis love indeed?
We men may say more, swearmore: but indeed
Our shows are more thanwill; for still we prove
Much in our vows, butlittle in our love.
But died thy sister of herlove, my boy?
I am all the daughters ofmy father's house,
And all the brothers too:and yet I know not.
Sir, shall I to this lady?
Ay, that's the theme.
To her in haste; give herthis jewel; say,
My love can give no place,bide no denay.
Come thy ways, SigniorFabian.
Nay, I'll come: if I losea scruple of this sport,
let me be boiled to deathwith melancholy.
Wouldst thou not be gladto have the niggardly
rascally sheep-biter comeby some notable shame?
I would exult, man: youknow, he brought me out o'
favour with my lady abouta bear-baiting here.
To anger him we'llhave the bear again;
and we will fool him black andblue: shall we not, Sir Andrew?
An we do not, it is pityof our lives.
Here comes the littlevillain.
How now, my metal ofIndia!
Get ye all threeinto the box-tree:
Malvolio's comingdown this walk:
he has been yonder i' the sun
practising behavior to hisown shadow this half hour:
observe him, for thelove of mockery;
for I know this letter will makea contemplative idiot of him.
Close, in the name ofjesting! Lie thou there,
for here comes the trout thatmust be caught with tickling.
'Tis but fortune;all is fortune.
Maria once told meshe did affect me:
and I have heard herselfcome thus near,
that, should she fancy,it should be one
of my complexion. Besides,she uses me with a more
exalted respect than anyone else that follows her.
What should I think on't?
Here's an overweeningrogue!
O, peace! Contemplation makesa rare turkey-cock of him:
how he jets under hisadvanced plumes!
'Slight, I could so beatthe rogue!
Peace, I say.
To be Count Malvolio!
Ah, rogue!
Pistol him, pistol him.
Peace, peace!
There is example for't;the lady of the Strachy
married the yeoman of thewardrobe.
Fie on him, Jezebel!
O, peace!
now he's deeply in: lookhow imagination blows him.
Having been threemonths married to her,
sitting in my state,--
O, for a stone-bow, to hithim in the eye!
Calling my officers about me,in my branched velvet gown;
having come froma day-bed,
where I have leftOlivia sleeping,--
Fire and brimstone!
O, peace, peace!
And then to have thehumour of state;
and after a demuretravel of regard,
telling them I know my place asI would they should do theirs,
to for my kinsman Toby,--
Bolts and shackles!
O peace, peace, peace!now, now.
Seven of my people, withan obedient start,
make out for him: Ifrown the while;
and perchance wind up watch, orplay with my--some rich jewel.
Toby approaches;courtesies there to me,--
Shall this fellow live?
Though our silence be drawnfrom us with cars, yet peace.
I extend my hand to himthus, quenching my familiar
smile with an austereregard of control,--
And does not Toby take youa blow o' the lips then?
Saying, 'Cousin Toby, myfortunes having cast me on
your niece give me thisprerogative of speech,'--
What, what?
'You must amend yourdrunkenness.'
Out, scab!
Nay, patience, or we breakthe sinews of our plot.
'Besides, you waste thetreasure of your time with
a foolish knight,'--
That's me, I warrant you.
'One Sir Andrew,'--
I knew 'twas I; for manydo call me fool.
What employment have wehere?
Now is the woodcock nearthe gin.
O, peace! and the spiritof humour intimate reading
aloud to him!
By my life, this is mylady's hand these be her
very C's, her U's and herT's and thus makes she her
great P's. It is, in contemptof question, her hand.
Her C's, her U's and herT's: why that?
'To the unknown beloved,this, and my good wishes:'
--her very phrases!By your leave, wax.
Soft! and the impressureher Lucrece,
with which she uses toseal: 'tis my lady.
To whom should this be?
This wins him, liver andall.
Jove knows I love: Butwho?
Lips, do not move;
No man must know.
'No man must know.'What follows?
the numbers altered!'No man must know:'
if this should bethee, Malvolio?
Marry, hang thee, brock!
I may command where Iadore;
But silence, like aLucrece knife,
With bloodless stroke myheart doth gore:
M, O, A, I, doth sway mylife.
A fustian riddle!
Excellent wench, say I.
'M, O, A, I, dothsway my life.'
Nay, but first, let me see,let me see, let me see.
What dish o' poison hasshe dressed him!
And with what wing thestaniel cheques at it!
'I may command where I adore.'Why, she may command me:
I serve her; she is my lady.
Why, this is evident toany formal capacity;
there is no obstructionin this: and the end,
--what should that alphabeticalposition portend?
If I could make thatresemble something in me,
--Softly! M, O, A, I,--
O, ay, make up that: he isnow at a cold scent.
Sowter will cryupon't for all this,
though it be asrank as a fox.
M,--Malvolio; M,--why,that begins my name.
Did not I say hewould work it out?
the cur is excellentat faults.
M,--but then there is noconsonancy in the sequel;
that suffers under probationA should follow but O does.
And O shall end, I hope.
Ay, or I'll cudgel him,and make him cry O!
And then I comes behind.
Ay, an you had anyeye behind you,
you might see moredetraction at your heels
than fortunes before you.
M, O, A, I; this simulationis not as the former:
and yet, to crush this alittle, it would bow to me,
for every one of these lettersare in my name. Soft!
here follows prose.
'If this fall intothy hand, revolve.
In my stars I am above thee; butbe not afraid of greatness:
some are born great,some achieve greatness,
and some have greatnessthrust upon 'em.
Thy Fates open their hands;
let thy blood andspirit embrace them;
and, to inure thyself towhat thou art like to be,
cast thy humble sloughand appear fresh.
Be opposite with a kinsman,surly with servants;
let thy tongue tang argumentsof state; put thyself into
the trick of singularity:
she thus advises theethat sighs for thee.
Remember who commendedthy yellow stockings,
and wished to see theeever cross-gartered:
I say, remember. Goto, thou art made,
if thou desirest to beso; if not, let me see
thee a steward still,the fellow of servants,
and not worthy to touchFortune's fingers. Farewell.
She that would alterservices with thee,
THE FORTUNATE-UNHAPPY.'
Daylight and champaigndiscovers not more:
this is open. I will be proud,I will read politic authors,
I will baffle Sir Toby, I willwash off gross acquaintance,
I will be point-devisethe very man.
I do not now fool myself, tolet imagination jade me;
for every reason excites tothis, that my lady loves me.
She did commend my yellowstockings of late,
she did praise my legbeing cross-gartered;
and in this she manifestsherself to my love,
and with a kind of injunctiondrives me to these habits
of her liking. I thankmy stars I am happy.
I will be strange, stout,in yellow stockings,
and cross-gartered, even withthe swiftness of putting on.
Jove and my stars be praised!
Here is yet a postscript.
'Thou canst not choosebut know who I am.
If thou entertainest my love,let it appear in thy smiling;
thy smiles become thee well;
therefore in mypresence still smile,
dear my sweet, I prithee.'
Jove, I thank thee:I will smile;
I will do everythingthat thou wilt have me.
I will not give my part ofthis sport for a pension
of thousands to be paidfrom the Sophy.
I could marry this wenchfor this device.
So could I too.
And ask no other dowry withher but such another jest.
Nor I neither.
Here comes my noblegull-catcher.
Wilt thou set thy foot o'my neck?
Or o' mine either?
Shall I play myfreedom at traytrip,
and become thybond-slave?
I' faith, or I either?
Why, thou hast puthim in such a dream,
that when the image of itleaves him he must run mad.
Nay, but say true; does itwork upon him?
Like aqua-vitae with amidwife.
If you will then see thefruits of the sport,
mark his first approachbefore my lady:
he will come to herin yellow stockings,
and 'tis a colour sheabhors, and cross-gartered,
a fashion she detests; andhe will smile upon her,
which will now be so unsuitableto her disposition,
being addicted to amelancholy as she is,
that it cannot but turn himinto a notable contempt.
If you will see it, follow me.
To the gates of Tartar,
thou most excellentdevil of wit!
I'll make one too.